I saw a tweet saying manual bidding was
making a comeback and I absolutely love
the topic. So I wanted to go into depth
with it.
So the whole thing is that smart bidding
works great because it bids higher and
lower for a number of factors that we
can't bid for directly with manual bits.
That's why it was so effective when it
actually starting using some of these
things and especially for shopping where
we don't even have access to the biggest
most important signal which is the
search query. That's why smart bidding
was so much better for shopping when it
actually came out. The drawback though
is that some clicks still have value
even though they can't be tracked and
smart bidding can't bid for what it
can't see. So, should you switch back to
manual bidding again? And what
alternatives is it that you have to get
the best of both worlds? And that's what
we'll explore today. Stay tuned for the
best way to validate whether the traffic
you buy without conversions is worth it
or not towards the end of the video.
Let's start with some complexity. The
there are two areas of complexity when
it comes to smart bidding and manual
bidding. The first one is long customer
journals. Topfunnel search queries
become under prioritized because
conversions can't be treated with back
to the original keyword that a user
used. So those topfunnel touch points
are important because if you if they
know you already and they search for a
bottom funnel keyword, then your CTR
will be higher which leads to higher
overall sales volume. But sometimes the
same user does not come back to search
for bottom funnel keywords at all.
They'll come in through meta ads, direct
email or SEO. And that leads us to leads
us to not have any value to give to top
funnel keywords at all even if people
come back for them afterwards. And that
way smart bidding will undervalue them.
In my opinion, top funnel keywords are
essential for scaling accounts,
especially for accounts with high AOV.
All this just simply just means that
you'll end up with an account that
doesn't scale. Now the second complexity
is traffic. Traffic has a value even if
we can't see it. Because again if 100
clicks leads to five conversions then
it's clear what the value of those five
clicks were. But does that mean that 95
clicks that didn't lead to a conversion
had zero value for you at all? The guess
then becomes when do you gain more by
moving to manual bidding versus staying
more efficient with smart bidding. In
90% of the accounts that we test with
switching over to manual bidding even
for the entire account or small parts of
it, smart bidding did better using
Google tracking as a measurement and
also when verifying in the back end. Now
let's jump into an account and I'll show
you one of our latest experiments of
doing so. So here's an example of what
we did. So you'll see here we'll have
16,000 clicks, 10,000 conversion value
about the same. about the same. And so
here on the 27th, we started making the
changes. And you can see we we started
increasing a bit in clicks, a little bit
in conversion value. And now we're
getting a lot more clicks, a lot like
50% more conversion value, which is kind
of worth it when you look at it.
However, if we go in and we say, okay,
let's try to see what did we actually
have to pay to do all this. You can see
it was simply not worth buying this much
additional traffic. And again, there are
different versions of this. And like you
can see where 135, 137, 131, 0.77,
120, 133. So it's like it's it like you
can argue yes, could we buy more more
conversion value? Could we buy more
quote unquote revenue, more customers?
Yes, definitely. There was more to get,
but we this it just wasn't efficient to
do it. Can we do it over a longer time
frame? Yes, yes, and yes. But this is
just a really good example of all the
times we actually try to make this
change. The truth is that outside of B2B
or niche accounts, it hardly ever makes
sense to make the complete transition to
manual bidding. At the same time, one of
the KPIs that we've brought back into
accounts in the growth stage, this is a
very very important part in the growth
stage is clicks. It's clear that there's
a value from getting relevant traffic
even if there's no direct conversions
related to that traffic. So what I
actually want to talk about now is does
it make sense to implement some of the
good things from manual bidding and what
can you do to get the best of both
worlds. So when I look at accounts I
look at them from two perspectives and I
basically categorize them into wartime
and peace time. This is stolen from a
book on business and I absolutely love
it. So I translated it into Google ads.
But wartime means that our profitability
is key and with no margin of error.
Solely spending your budget where it's
evident we get a return is the key part
about this stage. However, peace time
means that we have headroom in our
profitability. We are looking to grow
and we can handle some waste. And a
tactic to use here is to expand beyond
what on paper looks good. So what
tactics can we use instead of manual
bidding or instead of switching
completely to manual bidding to boost
traffic when smart bidding is trying to
be a little bit too efficient in ranked
order starting from least useful to most
useful. Let's start with number four. So
number four is manual CBC fallback
campaigns. This work by creating
duplicate campaigns like shopping or
search that you apply manual bits for.
Technically, when the bid in the
fallback campaign is higher than that in
the smart bidding campaign, whether it's
search shopping, the fallback campaign
will show up instead. This means that
whenever smart bidding isn't bidding
high enough, we have our fallback
campaigns to enforce a minimum bid in
the account, ensuring we get the
traffic. We used to do this a lot, but
with more options from Google, we rarely
do this anymore. Besides in job, it will
always run a fallback campaign, but
that's not particularly for traffic
purposes. Number three is we're lowering
ROS targets strategically. So when you
lower your ROS, you're telling smart
bidding to do one of two things. One,
increase the bids for existing
converting segments, search queries,
audiences, devices, etc. And the second
thing is that it will try to find new
segments to bid for because now it has
this headroom in the target. So it'll
try to pursue things that it didn't have
before. Lowering your rows target before
peak season or just strategically
throughout the year is a great way to
increase traffic. and at the same time
give smart bidding the ability to find
new search terms to bid for. Let's jump
into account. I'll try to show you an
example. So, here's a great example.
What we did was that we started lowering
the row targets uh because we're
starting to go into a peak season. And
here's just a before and after. So, we
got 20% more clicks, 15% higher CPCs,
40% higher cost. Well, yikes. Um but we
got a higher impression share. got 31%
more conversions and 20% more conversion
value. Our ROS did go down by 13%. In
this case, I will absolutely take it
because we got 20% more clicks and we
got further out and that's what we're
trying to do before a peak season.
Tactic number two is minimum bids in
portfolios. I do believe it's criminal
that you have to run portfolio bit
strategies to get access to minimum
bids, but it is what it is. Minimum bids
basically tell smart bidding to always
bid at least X amount. This is a great
way to ensure that you're always bidding
a minimum amount to get traffic no
matter what your conversion data is. So
again, let's go in. Let's just look on
account where we made this change
recently. So here we go in and we can
see we made a change where we removed
the minimum bit limit just to see what
would happen. And you can see here we
were at around 3,000 clicks and
literally from one day to another. And
this wasn't a magical day. It wasn't
Sunday to Monday or some other magical
day. It was Wednesday to uh Thursday. We
actually just dropped massively in
amount of clicks. Not that much in the
amount of conversion. It basically can't
tell that we've made this change in the
amount of conversions. But you can see
it in the amount of clicks and you can
also see it in the CBC. If we went in if
we go and look at it, we see right
around that time our CBC starts
increasing. And the reason why it
increases is because now we don't have
all of this traffic that we had before
at a lower CPC than the rest of the
campaign. So yes, our CPCs goes up, but
actually when we look at conversions,
they stay the same. So you can argue
this is again the whole thing I need to
where the whole thing comes in where we
talk about what value can smart bidding
see. This was for our best sellers. I
guarantee there's value in buying for
some of these uh buying some of these
clicks in, but we just can't show it.
And again, we implemented the minimum
bids again later. The whole thing here
that's really, really important when you
work with minimum bids is that you need
to work more on negative keywords than
you otherwise would to make sure that
you remove these completely irrelevant
search terms. But in my opinion, minimum
bids is a favorite in order to push
traffic in accounts. You can
strategically choose to only do this for
your bestselling products or your top
campaigns. However, my favorite favorite
new method I'm finally allowed to talk
about is number one, enable smart
bidding exploration. The reason why
lowering row targets was dropped to
number three on the list was because of
this feature that's finally out of beta.
It's called smart bidding exploration.
It allows smart bidding to hit a 10 to
30% lower row while exploring new search
terms that you're currently not bidding
for. It's not particularly meant to be a
trafficd driving mechanism in smart
bidding, but it's a nice side effect.
The official explanations for Google is
that it will open up smart bidding to
bid for less obvious search curves. The
typical example that I like to use is
the system knows that if we're selling
running shoes, it should be bidding for
running shoes. But what about the term
learning to run or firsttime runner or
running shoes for beginners? These are
less obvious terms that would be great
to get traffic from anyways and they
might lead to conversions, especially as
we're moving over to more AI based
chats. Also, combining smart bidding
exploration with minimum bids can
together be a great way to ensure you're
not letting smart bidding become too
single-minded with this focus on
efficiency. Now that we've reviewed the
four tactics, let's discuss how you can
verify that driving more traffic is
actually a good idea. One of the coolest
new features from Google Ads is the
native incrementality testing that came
out from Google Marketing Live in 2025.
The announcement from Google lowers the
bar for incrementality testing to $5,000
per month. Used to be $100,000 per
month. I'm not 100% convinced that you
should run $5,000 incrementality tests,
but the previous limit, like I
mentioned, was $100,000, which was
prohibited even for the accounts that I
run. So now we can run an incrementality
test to see if we get more conversions
overall from running minimum bids, from
running fallback campaigns, from
lowering our ROS targets, from running
smart bidding exploration. Just to
remind us all, what manual bidding does
great is that it buys traffic across all
audiences like I'm showing here. These
are all audiences, all devices, all
signals, search queries, product
attributes, seasonality. There's no
limitations. And the whole thing here is
that we don't we can't see what's
converting because we can't track
everything. With incrementality test and
we can see in black or white if we get
more conversions when we generate more
traffic or not. And to explain this, the
goal with an incrementality test here
like we're showing here in the slide is
that all the gray ones on the top are
people who didn't convert and all the
ones on the bottom are people who
converted whether or not they saw the ad
or not. There's people on left that saw
our ad and there's people on the right
that that didn't see our ad. And then
there's the people where that converted
because of the ad and those are in the
lavender color. They did see an ad and
they converted where the same group of
people that didn't see an ad didn't
convert. That's where again the same
thing we want to try to do with using
minimum bids where we have cohort one
where we're using minimum bids and then
we have cohort two where we're not using
minimum bids. On paper, cohort two will
be more efficient. The question that
we're trying to answer with
incrementality testing is whether
driving additional traffic using minimum
bits means we can drive additional
conversions we would otherwise not have
gotten. Again, that's the whole thing
we're trying to answer. Some other
things. If you can't run incrementality
tests, then just using blended rows
metric to confirm you're still
profitable in the end can be a good fail
safe to verify whether it makes sense to
buy the extra traffic or not. Post a
comment or or ask a question in the
comment section. I answer every single
one. So, make sure to get your comments
in or suggestions for new topics to
cover. If you're into practical PBC
insights that you can actually help you,
then subscribe. I share tips,
breakdowns, and call out what's working
and what's not. No fluff, just the stuff
that you can use every single